High in this video we're going to look at some performance considerations when we use the decimal class.
So there are some drawbacks to using the decimal class versus the floor class.
Now we saw in previous videos why we might want to use the decimal class but we saw that constructing
decimals are not that straightforward.
You have to use strings or topples.
So it's not as straightforward as constructing floats using just you know a numeric literals.
So you have to be a little bit more careful there.
And it's a little more tedious to create decimals.
The other thing too is that not all the mathematical functions that exist in the math Mondial have a
counterpart in the decimal class as we saw some operations like for example square root log exponents
and so on do have a counterpart in decimal.
But trigonometry functions Denot We also saw that the modern div operators don't walk the same way in
decimals as they do with integers and floats.
So again just things that you have to be aware of and sometimes be careful with.
Thirdly there's more memory overhead creating decimal objects takes a lot more memory than floats relatively
speaking.
So if you have a lot of decimals that there have to be in memory at the same time you're going to use
up more memory your memory footprint of your programs can be larger and maybe you know you'll run into
trouble.
That depends.
I mean usually these days you have so much memory and systems that it doesn't really matter.
But if you're doing a lot of numbers at the same time then you could run two issues.
And then lastly performance the performance of decimals and what I'm talking about performance.
I mean like arithmetic operators the math operators and so on is you know quite a lot slower than floats
relatively speaking.
Again we usually have high NCBI use that can run calculations very fast.
But if you have to do a lot of calculations then you'll start seeing that performance is really degraded
when it comes to decimals.
So again just things that you have to be aware of the drawbacks.
You can certainly use decibels and they can be really useful in certain situations.
But if you're not worried about the precision then you really want to opt to use floats.
So let's take a look at that in some code and see how all that actually works.
So the first thing we're going to look at is the memory footprint.
So for that.
Well first let's import our decimal class from the decimal module will need that.
And then we're also going to need the syste modules so we'll import that.
And let's go ahead and create two values to variables one pointing to a float three point 1 4 1 5 let's
say and the other one pointing to a decimal object with the same value in it.
So here we have a and b and we can look at the size in bytes.
So get size of a.
And that takes up 24 bytes.
But let's look at the size of the decimal object.
Get size 0.
And that is a whopping 104 bytes.
So every decimal object you create requies 104 bytes as opposed to the floats that required 24.
So that's almost five times as much so as you can see there's quite a larger memory footprint required
for decimal objects.
The next thing we want to look at is the computational performance.
And when you're dealing with floats use are pretty good at you know doing arithmetic calculations and
GPS use even more so.
And you'll notice that there's definitely a degradation when we use decimals.
So for that we're just going to do some rough timing again.
We're going to use the time module.
So we'll import time.
And we already have all decimal.
So that's fine.
And we're going to define two functions and we're going to basically loop through doing something.
The first thing we're going to look at is how long does it take to create a float versus creating a
decimal.
So let's go ahead and call this function.
Def run float will pass in a parameter and for the number of times we want to loop the same code and
we're just going to say for I in the range of end and all we're going to do here is just create a float.
OK.
So that's our run float and we're going to do the same thing.
But we're going to use decimals.
So death run death and hope and it goes once again just the default value for an eye and the range.
And so we'll loop end times a equals decimal of three point 1 4 1 5.
Again making sure we're passing a string when we do that.
OK.
So now we have those two methods that we are going to time and we're going to use a loop of 10 million.
So we're going to loop 10 million times just so we can see a little bit more with the differences.
And now we have to start so we do as a standard time of counter.
OK then we're going to run float with and iterations and then we're going to set all time and we're
going to read our full counter again.
That up kick and then we're going to print and say that the float operation took off and minus the downs
and minus kickstarts seconds.
OK.
And then we're going to do the same thing again.
I'm just going to copy and paste this but it's a run float we're going to run decimal.
OK.
So that should give us an indication of the fact that creating decimal objects takes quite a bit longer
than creating floats.
All right.
So it took 0.3 3 seconds to run this method here.
And it took two point eight two point nine seconds three seconds almost 10 times slower basically to
run the decimal version of that same method.
So now we can do the same thing again.
Let's copy paste this code and I'm going to copy paste this code as well since we're going to want to
rerun it.
But now instead of creating the float inside what we're going to do is we're going to create a big ones
outside of the loop.
So we're going to create at once and now we're going to look at an arithmetic operator we're just going
to add a book with a.
And then we're going to do the same thing here.
We're going to create the decimal here and then we're going to calculate a plus a we're not going to
assign it to a variable or anything like that.
We're not going to incur that overhead that's not what we're trying to measure.
We just want to see the time difference between additions with floats and additions with decimals.
Let's go ahead and run that.
And again as you can see zero point five seconds for the floats one second for the decimals.
So you know substantially slower.
Basically if you look at that it's a 100 percent slower to run the decimal OK.
So that's a simple arithmetic operator and it kind of behaves the same way if you put in a multiplication
sign you get approximately the same kind of difference between the two.
Right 0.4 9 1 second.
So that's fine.
You know you can also look at Division for example if you want and it's going to be a very similar result.
0.5 1.6 little slower there on the division which we probably would expect.
Now though other thing we want to look at now is the square root some of the mathematical functions
that are available in the decimal class.
So let's go ahead and do that.
So in order to do that we're going to make a couple of changes here.
I'm going to first call the math library because we're going to need the square root function from the
math module.
And now I'm going to change the timing the loop counter I should say to 5 million instead of 10 million.
I don't want to sit here waiting for too long for that that Sivells to finish.
So we're going to do the same thing here.
We're going to replace that with a square root.
And here we want to use the built in square root of the decimal class so we have to use the instance
method.
So a dot square root.
OK.
And those will be the two the two methods of two functions we're going to time.
So let's go ahead and run that.
And then we go the flow took almost 1 second to run 0.9 and I can keep talking for a little while and
that's why change that loop counter to 5 million instead of 10 million.
I'm running out of things to say let's just wait patiently
where we go.
Eighteen point eight seconds.
So as you can see substantially slower.
When we did the square root function and you'll find similar results when you look at logs and things
like that as well.
So these are some of the performance considerations when using decimals.
Obviously you don't want to use decimals just because you feel that you know you want extra precision.
You only want to use decimals if you know that you really have to have that extra level of precision
and that you don't want these problems that we get with binary floats having an exact we are infinite
basically representations of the our regular decimal representation that are finite like 0.1 is finite
as a decimal representation.
But it's an infinite binary representation.
So if those are things that you need to code around then decimals can work for you but otherwise stick
to floats.
They're more efficient they're run faster they're easier to work with.
All right.
Thanks for watching and I'll see you in the next video.